Add 1.60.0 blog post (#952)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2022-04-07-Rust-1.60.0.md

---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.60.0"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.60.0. Rust is a programming language empowering everyone to build reliable and efficient software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, you can get 1.60.0 with:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install]
from the appropriate page on our website, and check out the
[detailed release notes for 1.60.0][notes] on GitHub.
If you'd like to help us out by testing future releases, you might consider updating locally to use
the beta channel (`rustup default beta`) or the nightly channel (`rustup default nightly`). Please [report] any bugs you might come across!

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-1600-2022-04-07
[report]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/new/choose

## What's in 1.60.0 stable

> ### Instrumentation-based Code Coverage

Reviewer: cc @tmandry and @richkadel 

When you have a minute, please take a look at this part of the release announcement. Thanks! 🙂

Reviewer 2: The old version of coverage ("gcov") was also instrumentation based, but happened entirely in the LLVM backend using (lossy) debuginfo to map back to the source. This instrumentation is added by the language frontend before translation to LLVM IR and as a result is sometimes referred to as "source-based".

I talked about this some in the inside rust post first announcing the feature: https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2020/11/12/source-based-code-coverage.html

Reviewer 3: > This instrumentation is added by the language frontend before translation to LLVM IR and as a result is sometimes referred to as "source-based".

@tmandry - Just in case it's not clear (I had to re-read it before I realized what you were suggesting, I think), by "This instrumentation" you mean the new `-Cinstrument-coverage` (not "gcov"'s), and I think you are suggesting (and I agree) renaming the section:

```md
### Source-based Code Coverage
```

(which, FWIW, parallels clang's terminology for the same feature: https://clang.llvm.org/docs/SourceBasedCodeCoverage.html)

Support for LLVM-based coverage instrumentation has been stabilized in rustc, enabled with `-C instrument-coverage`. You can try this out on your code by rebuilding your code with `-Cinstrument-coverage`:

```shell=
RUSTFLAGS="-C instrument-coverage" cargo build
```

After that, you can run the resulting binary, which will produce

> a `default.profraw` file in the current directory. That can be consumed

Reviewer 3: Instead of the sentence starting "That can be consumed...", I suggest:

> The `llvm-tools-preview` component includes `llvm-profdata` for processing and merging raw profile output (coverage region execution counts); and `llvm-cov` for report generation. `llvm-cov` combines the processed output, from `llvm-profdata`, and the binary itself, because the binary embeds a mapping from counters to actual source code regions.

It's hard to make this explanation both terse and useful. You may want to word this differently.

by the `llvm-cov` binary shipped with rustc as part of the llvm-tools-preview
component.

```shell=
rustup component add llvm-tools-preview
$(rustc --print sysroot)/lib/rustlib/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/bin/llvm-profdata merge -sparse default.profraw -o default.profdata
$(rustc --print sysroot)/lib/rustlib/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/bin/llvm-cov show -Xdemangler=rustfilt target/debug/coverage-testing \
    -instr-profile=default.profdata \
    -show-line-counts-or-regions \
    -show-instantiations
```

The above commands on a simple helloworld binary produce this annotated report, showing that each line of the input was covered.

```
    1|      1|fn main() {
    2|      1|    println!("Hello, world!");
    3|      1|}
```

> For more details, please read the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/instrument-coverage.html) in the rustc book. The specific output format and LLVM tooling to consume it are both not guaranteed to exist in this specific form, but the baseline functionality will continue to exist for future Rust releases.

Reviewer 3: "both not guaranteed" sounds funny, plus it's not really clear what this means.

Perhaps, "The specific output format and the LLVM tooling are subject to change, but the baseline functionality..."

You might also add, "This is why it's also important to use the version of `llvm-tools-preview` matching the version of the Rust compiler.

### `cargo --timings`

Cargo has stabilized support for collecting information on build with the `--timings` flag.

```shell
$ cargo build --timings
   Compiling hello-world v0.1.0 (hello-world)
      Timing report saved to target/cargo-timings/cargo-timing-20220318T174818Z.html
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.98s
```

The report is also copied to `target/cargo-timings/cargo-timing.html`. A report on the release build of Cargo has been put up [here](/images/2022-04-07-timing.html). These reports can be useful for improving build performance.

> 

Reviewer 4: Just a suggestion, perhaps it might be helpful for people to find more information.  

```suggestion
More information about the timing reports may be found in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/timings.html).

```

> ### Weak feature dependencies in Cargo
> 
> Cargo has long supported [features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/resolver.html#features) along with optional dependencies, as illustrated by the snippet below.

Reviewer 4: I'm going to suggest making it clear that there are two new enhancements to features which are unrelated to one another, but are bundled together in this release. I think both are important and I think it would be good to make it clear.

Feel free to take or leave these suggestions.  I know it is tough to balance the verbosity and information density in the blog post, but hopefully these suggestions aren't too detailed.

```suggestion
### New syntax for Cargo features

This release introduces two new changes to improve support for [Cargo features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html) and how they interact with [optional dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html#optional-dependencies): Namespaced dependencies and weak dependency features.

Cargo has long supported features along with optional dependencies, as illustrated by the snippet below.
```

```toml
[dependencies]
jpeg-decoder = { version = "0.1.20", default-features = false, optional = true }

[features]
# Enables parallel processing support by enabling the "rayon" feature of jpeg-decoder.
parallel = ["jpeg-decoder/rayon"]
```

> The `"package-name/feature-name"` syntax will also enable package-name if it is an optional dependency. Often this is not what you want, and starting in 1.60, you can add a ? as in `"package-name?/feature-name"` which will only enable the given feature if something else enables the optional dependency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are two things to note in this example.  First, the optional dependency `jpeg-decoder` implicitly defines a feature of the same name, which provides a means to enable the dependency. Second, the `"jpeg-decoder/rayon"` syntax enables the `rayon` feature of the `jpeg-decoder` dependency, *and* also enables the `jpeg-decoder` dependency.

Namespaced features tackles the first issue that optional dependencies are implicitly exposed as part of a package's public interface. You can now use the `dep:` prefix in the `[features]` table to explicitly refer to an optional dependency. This gives you more control to define the feature corresponding to the optional dependency, and to hide optional dependencies behind more descriptive feature names.

Weak dependency features tackles the second issue where the `"package-name/feature-name"` syntax would enable `package-name` if it is an optional dependency. Often this is not what you want, and starting in 1.60, you can add a ? as in `"package-name?/feature-name"` which will only enable the given feature if something else enables the optional dependency.
```

More information about the timing reports may be found in the [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/cargo/reference/timings.html).

### New syntax for Cargo features

This release introduces two new changes to improve support for [Cargo features](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html) and how they interact with [optional dependencies](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html#optional-dependencies): Namespaced dependencies and weak dependency features.

Cargo has long supported features along with optional dependencies, as illustrated by the snippet below.

```toml
[dependencies]
jpeg-decoder = { version = "0.1.20", default-features = false, optional = true }

[features]
# Enables parallel processing support by enabling the "rayon" feature of jpeg-decoder.
parallel = ["jpeg-decoder/rayon"]
```

There are two things to note in this example.  First, the optional dependency `jpeg-decoder` implicitly defines a feature of the same name, which provides a means to enable the dependency. Second, the `"jpeg-decoder/rayon"` syntax enables the `rayon` feature of the `jpeg-decoder` dependency, *and* also enables the `jpeg-decoder` dependency.

> Namespaced features tackles the first issue that optional dependencies are implicitly exposed as part of a package's public interface. You can now use the `dep:` prefix in the `[features]` table to explicitly refer to an optional dependency. This gives you more control to define the feature corresponding to the optional dependency, and to hide optional dependencies behind more descriptive feature names.

Reviewer 5: Continuing the clarification above: 

```suggestion
Namespaced features tackles the first issue. You can now use the `dep:` prefix in the `[features]` table to explicitly refer to an optional dependency without implicitly exposing it as a feature. This gives you more control on how to define the feature corresponding to the optional dependency including hiding optional dependencies behind more descriptive feature names.
```

> Weak dependency features tackles the second issue where the `"package-name/feature-name"` syntax would enable `package-name` if it is an optional dependency. Often this is not what you want, and starting in 1.60, you can add a ? as in `"package-name?/feature-name"` which will only enable the given feature if something else enables the optional dependency.

Reviewer 5: And more clarification: 
```suggestion
Weak dependency features tackles the second issue where the `"optional-dependency/feature-name"` syntax would always enable `optional-dependency`. However, often you want to enable the feature on the optional dependency *only* if some other feature has enabled the optional dependency. Starting in 1.60, you can add a ? as in `"package-name?/feature-name"` which will only enable the given feature if something else has enabled the optional dependency.
```

For example, let's say we have added some serialization support to our library, and it requires enabling a corresponding feature in some optional dependencies. That can be done like this:

```toml
[dependencies]
serde = { version = "1.0.133", optional = true }
rgb = { version = "0.8.25", optional = true }

[features]
serde = ["dep:serde", "rgb?/serde"]
```

In this example, enabling the serde feature will enable the serde dependency. It will also enable the serde feature for the rgb dependency, but only if something else has enabled the rgb dependency.

### Incremental compilation status

> Incremental compilation is re-enabled for the 1.60 release. The Rust team continues to work on fixing bugs in incremental, but no problems causing widespread breakage are known at this time, so we have chosen to reenable incremental compilation. Additionally, the compiler team is continuing to work on long-term strategy to avoid future problems of this kind. That process is in relatively early days, so we don't have anything to share yet on that front. 

Reviewer 6: this looks good to me.

for details).

The `llvm-tools-preview` component includes `llvm-profdata` for processing and
merging raw profile output (coverage region execution counts); and `llvm-cov`
for report generation. `llvm-cov` combines the processed output, from
`llvm-profdata`, and the binary itself, because the binary embeds a mapping from
counters to actual source code regions.

```shell=
rustup component add llvm-tools-preview
$(rustc --print sysroot)/lib/rustlib/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/bin/llvm-profdata merge -sparse default.profraw -o default.profdata
$(rustc --print sysroot)/lib/rustlib/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/bin/llvm-cov show -Xdemangler=rustfilt target/debug/coverage-testing \
    -instr-profile=default.profdata \
    -show-line-counts-or-regions \
    -show-instantiations
```

The above commands on a simple helloworld binary produce this annotated report, showing that each line of the input was covered.

```
    1|      1|fn main() {
    2|      1|    println!("Hello, world!");
    3|      1|}
```

For more details, please read the
[documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/instrument-coverage.html) in the

> rustc book. While the specific output format and LLVM tooling which produces it
> are subject to change, the baseline functionality is stable and will exist in
> some form in all future Rust releases. For this reason, it is important to make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
rustc book. The baseline functionality is stable and will exist in some form
in all future Rust releases, but the specific output format and LLVM tooling which
produces it are subject to change. For this reason, it is important to make
```

I think this improves the flow with the following sentence

```toml
[dependencies]
serde = { version = "1.0.133", optional = true }
rgb = { version = "0.8.25", optional = true }

[features]
serde = ["dep:serde", "rgb?/serde"]
```

In this example, enabling the serde feature will enable the serde dependency. It will also enable the serde feature for the rgb dependency, but only if something else has enabled the rgb dependency.

### Incremental compilation status

Incremental compilation is re-enabled for the 1.60 release. The Rust team continues to work on fixing bugs in incremental, but no problems causing widespread breakage are known at this time, so we have chosen to reenable incremental compilation. Additionally, the compiler team is continuing to work on long-term strategy to avoid future problems of this kind. That process is in relatively early days, so we don't have anything to share yet on that front.

### `Instant` monotonicity guarantees

On all platforms `Instant` will try to use an OS API that guarantees monotonic
behavior if available (which is the case on all tier 1 platforms). In practice
such guarantees are -- under rare circumstances -- broken by hardware,

> virtualization or operating system bugs. To work around these bugs and platforms

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
virtualization, or operating system bugs. To work around these bugs and platforms
```

> not offering monotonic clocks `Instant::duration_since`, `Instant::elapsed` and

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
not offering monotonic clocks, `Instant::duration_since`, `Instant::elapsed` and
```

> `Instant::sub` saturate to zero. In older Rust versions this lead to a panic

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
`Instant::sub` now saturate to zero. In older Rust versions this led to a panic
```

instead. `Instant::checked_duration_since` can be used to detect and handle
situations where monotonicity is violated, or `Instant`s are subtracted in the
wrong order.

This workaround obscures programming errors where earlier and later instants are
accidentally swapped. For this reason future Rust versions may reintroduce

> panics in at least those cases.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
panics in at least those cases, if possible and efficient.
```

Prior to 1.60, the monotonicity guarantees were provided through mutexes or
atomics in std, which can introduce large performance overheads to
`Instant::now()`. Additionally, the panicking behavior meant that Rust software
could panic in a subset of environments, which was largely undesirable, as the

> authors of that software may not be in a place to upgrade the operating system,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
authors of that software may not be able to fix or upgrade the operating system,
```

hardware, or virtualization system they are running on. Further, introducing

> unexpected panics into these environments make Rust software less reliable and

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
unexpected panics into these environments made Rust software less reliable and
```

portable, which is of higher concern than exposing typically uninteresting

> platform bugs to end users.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
platform bugs in monotonic clock handling to end users.
```
